---
title: Why Butterfloat v2?
tags: [preview]
---

# Why Butterfloat v2?

I think it is worth documenting the motivation behind compatibility breaks,
because it helps to know that such things were at least thoughtful and
well-considered.

I've been taking compatibility seriously in Butterfloat and I hope is shows.
I was very proud to release as complex feature as [Stamps](../stamps.md)
in Butterfloat v1.5 without breaking exterior API compatibility, and even
keeping its additional overhead mostly opt-in.

There were two big trains of thought that smashed into each other, leading
into the v2 rewrite: Stamp-first/Stamp-"native" design and Contextual JSX.
The combined potential for performance gains and new features seemed a
strong reason to support a v2 rewrite in ways that one train or the other
alone might not have suggested.

## Stamp-first

There has been a lot learned since Stamps have been added to Butterfloat.
In the time since Stamps launched in v1.5, I think they've become somewhat
indispensable. They help performance in noticeable and subtle ways.
I find they are generally worth the time to build in most projects.

In v1.5, Stamps use a completely different DOM build function than normal
runtime. This was a concession for the most backwards compatibility, and
while it increased duplicate code, the Stamp builder is usually a compile-time
tool or server-side rendering tool, so not as much an efficiency issue
in runtime performance in most v1.5 Stamps use-cases.

More interestingly/worrying, there were subtle changes to the way that
Stamps build DOM elements that have somewhat diverged from how the runtime
DOM builder builds them. Some of those have been improvements, but it was
too much of a backwards compatibility issues to apply them to the existing
runtime builder. In part because different DOM output could be seen as a
compatibility break.

On the features backlog for the v1.5 version of Stamps, that would be hard
to provide in the v1.5 runtime have been requests for crossing component
boundaries ("deep" stamps) as a path to larger server-side rendering and
static site generation gains, and "just-in-time" stamping to build Stamps
at runtime if a component becomes frequently used as a path to provide
some of the performance benefits of Stamps even without using SSR/SSG
approaches/compile-time tools.

## Contextual JSX

A core motivation of Butterfloat has always been that
[Butterfloat is not a Virtual DOM](./tsx.md). I want to provide some of
the benefits of a Virtual DOM like the possibility to test Components
without the need for a DOM or DOM-emulation library. But I also want to
provide a different performance story than a Virtual DOM has.

I had started thinking that the `NodeDescription` objects of v1.0 were
somewhat getting in the way of some low level performance optimizations.
A benefit to a TSX compile is that it compile-time unrolls the recursion
into a tree as nested function calls that get called one at a time without
recursion. There would be some benefits to building DOM elements directly
during JSX calls, rather than the intermediate `NodeDescription` objects.

I was lamenting that JSX doesn't have the equivalent of "tagged templates"
to easily change which "tag" function is used in different Components in the
same file. I was reminded that the `"react"` compile of TSX relies solely
on `jsx` functions already in scope (with no auto-import). Butterfloat was
already recommending that approach to TSX compilation.

At that reminder, I nerdsniped myself into exploring scope options and
realized that Butterfloat already had a good, working mechanism that could
contextually inject different `jsx` functions depending on exact runtime
needs: the `ComponentContext<T>` could be expanded to be a `jsx` injection
tool.

With context-specific `jsx` functions, DOM elements could be eagerly
built when asked to do so. The `NodeDescription` could remain for test
contexts when DOM testing isn't desirable. Bindings could be eagerly
collected with or without building DOM elements or `NodeDescription`
objects.

I also realized that Contextual JSX could also help improve building trees
or collecting bindings for full trees of components all at once, with fewer
concerns for recursion limits. Though I also realized that would require
additional investment into Completion Boundaries beyond the implicit
model in the Component runtime since v1.0.
